learn: add learning resources (#41)
botlabs-gg/yagpdb-docs-v2: content/learn/beginner/outputs-1.md

+++
title = "Outputs 1"
weight = 210
+++

In this chapter, we will go over two ways to output text from a custom command: using the *response*, and later on using
*template actions*.

## Response

> If you paste text into the response field of a custom command, the bot will respond with that text when the command is

Reviewer: "with the same text"

triggered.

> For instance, paste the following text into a new custom command:

Reviewer: "create a new custom command with the following response:"

avoids the duplication of "paste".

```go
Hello World.
```

This will make the bot respond "Hello World." in a new message when the command is triggered, as shown below.

<center>

![Hello World example ran in Discord.](hello_world.png)

</center>

## Template Actions

### Actions As Output

Earlier, we just made the bot respond with some static text. However, sometimes (or rather, most of the time) we want to

> change that around depending on various factors. This is where *template actions* come in.

Reviewer: "However, often we want our custom command to behave differently depending on input. This is where ..."

Template actions are a way to dynamically change the output depending on various things, such as the user who triggered

> the command, the arguments passed to the command, or even the current time.

Reviewer: "depending on environmental data"

I don't particularly like the word "environmental", but something better than "various things" is needed.

The bot evaluates the template action and replaces it with the result of the evaluation. For instance, the following
code will make the bot respond with the server name when the command is triggered:

```go

> {{ .Server.Name }}

Reviewer: would rather use .Guild here

```

As you can see, it differs from the static response in that it uses double curly braces (`{{` and `}}`) to denote an

> action. Without those, the bot would just respond with the text as-is.

Reviewer: "The double curly braces (`{{` and `}}`) are essential: without these, the bot would simply respond with the text verbatim."

It may be worth adding a separate example illustrating this common pitfall, e.g., a command with the response `Hello .User.Username`.

If we want to bring this a step further, we can combine the plain response with some template actions to make it a bit
more nicer-looking:

```go

> Hey there {{.User.Username}}!

Reviewer: nit: space

Welcome to {{ .Server.Name }}!
```

Play around with this a little bit and see what you can come up with. Take a look at the
[data reference documentation](/docs/reference/templates/syntax-and-data) to see what other data you can access.

> ### Actions For Computation

Reviewer: I wonder if there is a framing of this introduction that allows a smoother transition to actions that, well, simply perform actions. For instance, `addRoleID` adds a role but is not a computation or a task per se.

Author: `addRoleID` is a task though—"add the role with this ID".

I do agree however, "Computation" is a bit weird, I had a mental note to change this to something better as well.

Author: Maybe `Actions For Functionality`? But that also reads like :sparkles: hot garbage :sparkles:

Template actions can also be used to perform computations (tasks) and return the result. This allows you to create

> extremely powerful custom commands that do much more than just output some random text. For instance, the following

Reviewer: "do much more than simply output text"

code will make the bot respond with the sum of two numbers when the command is triggered:

```go
{{ add 5 3 }}
```

> Obviously this is a very simple example. We provide a list of all available functions in the

Reviewer: "contrived example"

the command, the arguments passed to the command, or even the current time.

The bot evaluates the template action and replaces it with the result of the evaluation. For instance, the following
code will make the bot respond with the server name when the command is triggered:

```go
{{ .Guild.Name }}
```

As you can see, it differs from the static response in that it uses double curly braces (`{{` and `}}`) to denote an
action. The braces are essential: without these, the bot would simply respond with the text verbatim. A common pitfall
we often see in the support channels is something like the following:

```go
Hello .User.Username!
```

If we want to bring this a step further, we can combine the plain response with some template actions to make it a bit
more nicer-looking:

```go
Hey there {{ .User.Username }}!
Welcome to {{ .Guild.Name }}!
```

Play around with this a little bit and see what you can come up with. Take a look at the
[data reference documentation](/docs/reference/templates/syntax-and-data) to see what other data you can access.

### Actions for Functions

> Custom command functions allow you to do various things, such as performing calculations, adding or removing a role from
> a user, or even sending a message to a channel. The syntax is a little different to what you might be used to; the
> function name comes before its arguments, like so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Custom command functions allow you to perform calculations, add or remove roles to/from
a user, send messages to a channel, and lots more! The syntax is a little different to what you might be used to; All
arguments to a function follow the function name itself, like so:
```
I don't like "do various things."

```go
{{ add 5 3 }}
```

Some functions also return the result of their operation, which can be used in other functions. For example:

```go
{{ mult 5 (add 3 2) }}
```

Just like in math, the expression inside the parentheses is evaluated first, and then that result is used in the outer
expression.

Obviously these are both quite contrived examples. We provide a list of all available functions in the
[functions reference documentation](/docs/reference/templates/functions). Try to experiment around with some of these

> functions to get a feel for how they're called and what they do.

Author: I meant "called" as in "making a function *call*"; though probably more / most natural would be "how they're used" in that case.
